[Music]
hello and welcome to the latest explore
livestream today is a super special
event as we're celebrating the 50th big
question here on explore and I am
incredibly excited I am always excited
you've seen these before I always say
I'm excited to be here and I really am
but today is super super special so we
have a whole panel of students across
various different subjects we're gonna
be asking them about their biggest
questions in their subject and of course
as always we want you guys watching to
get in touch with your own big questions
so you can get in touch on the chat
window you can get in touch on social
media at let's explore I think we're on
Twitter and Instagram and you there will
be a prize draw for our favorite big
question which will be open until 11
a.m. on Monday so you can send your
questions in during the broadcast now
and I will put them to the panel and you
can also keep sending them in until
Monday and you can have a chance to win
a prize right so before we get on to
meeting our panel here's a little video
just to give you an intro of what we're
hoping to talk about today
[Music]
so as you can hopefully see there are
many big questions across many different
subjects which is exactly why we have a
panel of three current students at the
University of Oxford all from various
different subject areas so let's meet
them first of all we have Esther would
you like to introduce yourselves to our
audience yes hello my name is Esther I
study philosophy politics and economics
at Oriel College and I am from South
East London so PPE
philosophy politics and economics is
essentially the study of why who what
where and when we're asking the five W's
and we're trying to solve all of these
big questions so anything related to
philosophy politics or the economics the
clue is in the name of the subject
please do get in touch again send us
your questions and we can put those
questions to Esther right Felix hi I'm
Felix
I'm from Syrus school which is in South
Wales just outside of Cardiff I study
engineering and engineering is a very
broad discipline that ranges from things
like building bridges to building things
like computers so it's a lot of maths
it's a lot of physics and a lot about
how we can apply that to the real world
so we look a huge range of things but
I'd say the common denominator is
looking at applying the math to the real
world
I'm very glad you mentioned master so
everyone dreads at the start those who
don't know me I'm a I'm tall I'm a
mathematician I teach maths here at the
University of Oxford so I'm super happy
you mentioned master Felix so anything
Maxie engineering ye physics C my both
myself and Felix I love a go at that and
pour our thoughts across for you and
finally we have Olivia hi I'm Olivia I
study history at Merton College
I'm from South Yorkshire which is
probably really obvious from my accent
you probably know what history is but
there are loads of different types of
history you can look at you can look at
politics or culture so for me for
example I do everything from Joan of Arc
in medieval France to film history in
20th century America film history
I like this film history questions guys
I will they sound fun right Thank You
Olivia
so the theme today the big theme is what
exactly is a big question what makes one
of these questions that we discuss on on
explore and on the site and during these
these sort of livestream events and as I
said we really want you guys to get
involved today this is your chance to
send in your big questions on any topic
so chat window social media at it let's
explore get in touch send them to us and
we will be discussing them with the
panel so to kick us off Esther you
mentioned you study PPE so what would
you say is your biggest question from
your subject this is a very interesting
question because of the fact that it's
three distinct subjects but I'd say the
biggest question is does one size fit
all which is quite ironic considering
it's three different subjects but in
politics for example politics is the
study of how you govern people so for
example if you're looking at a
dictatorship whereby one person says
what it is and it goes basically or an
aristocracy which is where the
upper-class rule or a democracy in which
most people would agree on is how we
should govern but then even if you look
further into that what should count is
like an eligible voting citizen so is
should age be a limit an age in
different countries and different
contexts and different cultures has
different bearings and different
significance so I think that's a very
important question it applies to
philosophy also so if you look at FX
does one size fit all can we say that an
action is bad in and of itself or can
you say that a person is bad in and of
themselves same with economics there are
so many theories in economics that are
underpinned
by certain things such as rationality
but does that hold in every single
culture so my biggest question is does
one size fit all I think as you some
hinted out and you said it covers all
three of your topics I think it really
does cover almost every single subject
area possible so if you guys don't think
of any way to relate that question to
perhaps your favorite subject again do
let us know Felix
so same question your biggest your
biggest big question right so in
engineering I think the biggest big
question which is kind of facing all of
humanity at the moment is how do we go
about solving climate change is a
massive massive issue that's kind of
facing us we've kind of got to do
something about it pretty soon so what
engineers will be asking is can we use
technology and technological
advancements to help solve climate
change so on the one hand you'll get
loads of people that say yes yes we'll
invent all these new amazing things and
they'll solve all our problems for us
like things called like carbon capture
where we just take all the excess carbon
dioxide out of the atmosphere will that
solve our problems if we make new
machines that are really efficient that
means we won't have to use so much
energy to do the same things that we're
doing before and loads of things that we
can do with technology and it's just
only getting better and nobody really
knows what's gonna be around the corner
maybe in 20 years we'll invent something
that would be like the silver bullet
that will just extinguish all our
problems however there's also going to
be a bunch of people that are saying
well look at where technology's got us
now it's so for example look at
aeroplanes now people are gonna be
wanting to fly around the world and no
matter how you do it that's gonna take a
lot of energy so maybe we just need to
change our behavior and despite what
technology we invent it might require us
to use more energy than we really have
on the earth so maybe technology can
help us solve climate change yeah so as
you mentioned climate change of course a
huge issue whose problem currently
facing us here on on the planet I am
during my my PhD I actually was involved
in a project that was creating climate
models so sort of you hear all these
things about climate modeling and we
have basically huge computer simulations
which recreate the conditions on
earth and you input data and then they
tell us what's going to happen to the
temperature that's how we make these
predictions to say you know that the the
temperature will rise by two degrees in
the next 50 years so these are all based
on data we collect now and then
mathematical models run through computer
simulations and one of my as part of
this project I actually got to sail
around Antarctica was awesome on on a
ship for six weeks collecting data from
the ocean so the Southern Ocean is the
sort of the least affected ocean by the
human population because it's the most
isolated and so the idea being that that
is the least affected by humans and
therefore gives you the best reading of
how the planet is currently doing so
that's sort of one example of how we
make these predictions and we have these
models for climate change but in terms
of how we're perhaps going to combat it
like you were saying there's we don't
really know what these technologies are
going to be we're using technology to
then observe climate change better and
things like that so we come need it and
it's might not be helpful as long ya
know very because of course I guess me
sailing around the southern ocean is
therefore polluting the the current
unpolluted southern ocean so it's you
know you're right I think that so is a
really nice link between why this is
such an important issue awesome
thank you right Olivia so again biggest
big question in history so I would say
the biggest big question in history is
what can we learn about the present from
the past so people might say that
history is kind of irrelevant you know
why aren't you doing something
vocational like looking at law or
medicine but if we didn't look at
history then we would have no idea why
the present is like it is we would just
be like okay so we're governed by a
prime minister but we've kind of got
this this queen knocking around what are
you doing here like well we need history
to tell us that it wasn't always like
this then we've developed and we've
changed things we can also use the past
to kind of guide us in the present we
look and look at failures we can look at
successes things like in 1930s America
we started loads of loads more welfare
with the New Deal which you can learn
about and that kind of indicates why
it's so important for modern-day welfare
like Obamacare which is a huge issue and
then I say lastly I think people
underestimate how important history is
for shared identities so nationalism you
know why you're part of England and what
makes that special for different
communities and groups knowing your
history is really important some
cultures rely on oral history which
essentially means that they didn't
necessarily write things down they spoke
and that was how they transmitted
information and spoke to each other and
created like a culture where as
historians we can come in and find
different bits of evidence of oral
history and interviews and supplement it
with like written things to try and help
recover the lost identities of maybe
groups that have been marginalized in
some way so I think that's our biggest
question fantastic and we actually had a
previous big question on Explorer which
was could we live on another planet and
we had a historian a classicist on the
on the panel and we were sort of looking
at how we can learn from past
civilizations if we were to go to a new
planet and build a new civilization how
can we learn from the past to help us do
that yes so I think that just looks
perfectly into what you were saying is
like what can we learn from the past how
can history help us in what we're doing
today and with the future
fantastic right thank you very much guys
so hopefully lots for you all to be
thinking about so you know a little bit
more now about our panel about their
interests and their thoughts and their
big questions so again send us your
thoughts and their big questions and
most importantly send us your big
questions based around PPE engineering
and history and also maths if you want
I mean maybe I'll have a go we'll see
right so we now have a multiple-choice
question which all of the panel are
going to have a go at we're going to
discuss and you guys watching or also
please do get involved have a vote in
your in your class with your friends you
know again send us your thoughts what
you think and why so the question is as
follows what is the oldest form of life
on earth is it a
single-cell organisms be mammals see
dinosaurs or D stromatolites which are
rocks made from bacteria who would like
to jump in on this one first well I
guess with history it's quite a
difficult one because it's not
necessarily something we look at but
it's an example of where like a
historian might start to steal things
from other disciplines and combine our
knowledge so we would start looking our
archaeology and fossils and try and see
what we could learn from that I
personally have no idea what the answer
is
I sure do scientific history but that's
I think how a historian might approach
it it's can I just turn into so you
mentioned there the you would borrow
from archaeology yes so how is
archaeology different from history so
Lots adds archaeology would is
specifically I guess recovering things
like fossils and old buildings and what
we can learn so like we'd call it
material culture like the objects that
we'd find from the past and as a
historian we love that we jump on
someone who is like here's this old
object we're like get rid of that thank
you and then we can look at that and
compare that to writings and ask
questions about it and that that's kind
of what we're more of the word side of
things
archaeologists are more of the go out
into a desert and do things kind of side
but you need both to get as I say sounds
very much like the collaboration and it
ok teamwork
awesome sorry right bye it's a multiple
choice I said you'll have a go it's a
really good question I guess you have to
consider the question in and of itself
say what is life so is life you know
something that is sentient that has
moral significance something that can
make decisions or is life something very
simply that can respire that can
reproduce I look at ethics and I'd say
for something to have quote-unquote life
it needs to have moral significance for
it to have moral significance it needs
to be free to make choices so I would go
with the answer mammals because I think
are probably the earliest example of a
sentient being that makes free choices
so okay we have we have an answer on the
table I forgot to ask Olivia you're
gonna have to make you vote but they
will do it at the end
well that will let Felix good next so we
have V mammals from from esta okay well
I know approach it from more sciency
biology point of the are take and taking
the form of life as in something that
just respires so all of those options I
would call life so in terms of which one
came first I guess I'd like look at the
chemistry of which one in each needs so
you think like a mammal they're going to
need a lot of different forms of like
the carbohydrates and proteins they're
going to need a lot of different organic
molecules to then survive so I think may
come later dinosaurs would be the same
thing so it's between the stromatolites
or the single-celled organisms whose
needs are kind of relatively simple we
just need some one sort of chemical in
order to exist basically I'm gonna go
with the single-celled because I think
the stromatolites you described it as
rocks with bacterial rocks made from
bacteria well I'm gonna go single-cell
because bacteria are single-celled I
think okay I'm gonna go with a wasn't it
yes yes yes okay so we have more votes
for beat one both hey Olivia I probably
are probably join in with be in the in
the sense that when when things start to
get to a mammal as a historian we can
start to think more about it and more
about what they do whereas I don't know
how I'd write the history of a single
cell great so of course this was a
desired on purpose to not have an
obvious correct answer this is an
example of a big question because
exactly as as all of the panel have
mentioned particular ester was saying
what is life in itself it all depends on
how you determine that so we've got the
scientific perspective something that
respires the historical perspective
something we can learn from and then of
course the philosophy sort of just the
idea of what is indeed life and the
sentient being and sort of the answer
being mammals so the answer I am gonna
go with now this we're gonna take this
as correct
but as I said there is no correct
that's it near so if you think it's not
the one I'm gonna say please don't shout
but you let us know why you don't think
that's right and why you think one of
the others might be right or who you
agree or disagree with it's all about
discussion and inclusion here so I'm
gonna say that the answer is D this
stromatolite because we have fossilized
evidence of stromatolite from 3.5
billion years ago so you know this is
the oldest thing that we have which did
sort of existed as some kind of organism
and so we have the evidence for three
and a half billion years ago but some
scientists do believe that we they may
have existed as long as four and a half
billion years ago we just haven't found
the evidence yet so not only do we have
a big question here we have a challenge
for our audience can you find a four and
a half billion year old stromatolite
that would be awesome
that you would definitely get a prize in
our prize draw real-life sub 4 before
1/2 billion euros to rattle you probably
also get some kind of nobel prize but
you know challenges set i've learnt a
new word stromatolite
yes remark to learn it rocks another
challenge might be spelling it if it an
STR om a tol ites rocks made from
bacteria yeah word for the day right
also thank you so much everybody
very fun so um another thing before we
come on to your questions from the
audience I just got one final question
for you all to hopefully really open up
the discussion here is so we're thinking
about sort of what is what makes a big
question so I'd love to get your guys
thoughts on what to you either through
your personal experience or opinion or
through your subject what makes a big
question and sort of in your opinion and
I guess we'll go in order let's start
with you Esther
yeah I'd say a big question doesn't need
to be anything that's like super
complicated or like that you've been
thinking about for years I think it's
just anything that doesn't have a
straightforward answer so in my opinion
any open question is a big question even
if you were to ask what would be your
perfect day that's a big question
because it requires
to think and it requires I guess a range
of perspectives so if it's a sunny day
maybe I'd do this if it's a windy day
I'd do this so I'd say a big question is
anything that's not straightforward with
a yes or no answer I'd say I'd call a
big question something that has like a
big impact on what we do so there
climate change one for example though I
was talking about that's got a big
impact on what we do because because
you've got to think about like where do
we go from here and what kind of combat
this problem and to like to answer this
big question so it's something a big
question to me is something that again
is open-ended so there's no easy right
answer and work through the maths and
solve it that's not going to be a big
question big question is going to be
saying it's that clever people are going
to be arguing over a lot in order to
determine the right way to go back to
yeah I think a big question is
definitely just something that lots of
different disciplines are required for
so you know you couldn't just have a
mathematician or a scientists in a room
and talk about they have to think about
the ethics or they have to think about
the history and you know it's not
something that one Wikipedia page is
ever going to be the answer for you've
got to look at different people and see
what they think and kind of research
around so so much what do you think
that's awesome thank you so much right
so that's a lot for you guys to thinking
about and I've got now so your questions
you set in so I'm gonna put these to the
panel so I hope you guys are ready for
this second every question for the whole
panel the kick is off we have Charlie in
here Ted so hello Charlie who asks what
would happen if all of humanity were
immortal so I think is a fantastic
question so I'm just gonna stray liyan
I'm just just why you guys have a little
time to think I'm just gonna say if
everyone was immortal then of course the
numbers I'm just think Madtown the
numbers we're just gonna keep growing
and growing and growing so surely we
would just fill up the earth user pull
our resources and then I guess I would
say we'd all die but we're a mortal so I
don't really know but from the only
numbers perspective I can see there
would be some kind of issue there for
sure
in terms of like you know they're
fitting on the planet maybe we'd have to
expand maybe we have to go to different
solar system who knows
guys thoughts what would happen if we
were all immortal I think we'd all been
really really clever because we would
have lived for so long we'd have seen so
much we would have had all the time in
the world to learn everything and we'd
all be yeah well I think as a population
we'd probably be really or hyper
intelligent I don't know maybe there's
only so much intelligence one person can
have and then I'll get to it and stop
it's hard to tell yeah I think my job
would be so much easier if everyone had
always been immortal if I was doing
doing an essay on Henry the eighth then
he was still knocking around I just pop
over for tea at his house and ask him a
question it would definitely change the
way we thought about the past if
everyone could remember it and our
history would be we'd still be arguing
about the English Civil War if we were
all still alive because things just
wouldn't get resolved as easily I think
as you notice things change as
generations move on and it can be
interesting as well with you saying if
everyone remembered everything but of
course people recall memories
differently yes so you'd still sort of
need that I think that historical
interpretation right so it wouldn't be
as easy as how everyone was alive
everyone remembers we all know what
happens because people would call things
differently so you would still
absolutely would still need a story I'll
put my economics hat on quite similar
thing I think we'd really have to
consider how we use resources and I
think there'd be more of a focus on
man-made resources because natural
resources unless they're immortal - they
will
you know deplete on top of that I think
we don't be really tired you know think
we don't be very tired and that might
also we'll be really lazy - because yeah
I can always do it tomorrow - right
thank you Charlie that was a great one
right okay number two this is a question
from lie above I hope you saying that
correctly hello sorry if I'm not and he
was asked do
equality exists I guess could it ever
exist might be another way to interpret
that question anyone want to jump in on
that one first I guess it depends how
you define equality because if you if
you are being particularly logical you'd
say everyone would have to have exactly
the same experience with everything for
everyone to be equal but we see that
it's just impossible so I think it
depends on what you consider equality to
be I don't know what you guys think but
I guess that's quite so that's in terms
of like specific equality but you can
look at more general sales like it
doesn't matter if not everyone is in has
exactly the same excuses but kind of the
same sort of access to health care and
things like that so you could talk about
thats like well if we can all go and see
a doctor when we want then we recall in
that perspective and that would be a
form of equality so you can look at
different forms of equality some may be
easier to to implement to have everyone
equal in that standing than others so
yeah I think it's a combination like
exactly what the two of you just said
there's resource equality so does
everyone have equal access to resources
but then there's also value equality so
does everyone have the same value of
life is everyone seen as having like so
do I inherently think I have an equal
value of life to others but then do
others see me as having an equal value
of life so I think there's those two
sides with regards to resources I think
it's very much possible with regards to
value I think it's very much dependent
on the individual so that one I'll leave
to you to answer hope you didn't mean me
because I I don't know why but this next
one however I am a big fan of this next
one so this is this is anonymous guys
please send us your names so this one
say is can we develop artificial
intelligence without it controlling us
science fiction says no yeah I just
don't know I think experiment terms fill
Minister is yes what do we think can we
develop artificial intelligence without
it controlling this so I can I can throw
in something which which I
I know a little bit on this topic so I
interviewed a researcher he works in
intelligence and machine learning and
developing you know these algorithms
that's his company and he was explaining
sort of talking about this idea that if
we create machines or intelligence that
reaches the level of being as
intelligent as a human then in theory
the machine is there an intelligent
enough to recreate its self and sort of
pass through that threshold so like
reaching the level of intelligence equal
to the humans that created it is the
threshold and once we hit that it then
will just grow forever it's almost like
that's the step because once you get
past that it can then just keep going
because once we create something more
intelligent than us that thing more
intelligent than us come on create
something even boy tells it I keep going
brother so it's like so that's one way
of looking at I don't know how you would
measure that I don't know I would work
but surely at the end of the day these
artificial intelligence is just going to
be essentially lines of computer code
it's gonna be like it's gonna be sort of
computing and things like that so surely
we can always just have an off button
completely killer if it starts trying to
take control or something like that so
that's it disabled it's off button is
like maybe we create intelligence that's
whit's us perhaps in terms of control I
look at like politics and like govern so
could artificial intelligence at some
point end up governing us I think that's
very possible if as you said the
threshold has been met and then it just
keeps on getting more and more
intelligent then what's to say that you
know something that is artificial
artificially intelligent can't govern us
as humans as individuals can it like
control something I don't know take over
our minds I know that's a little bit
that's a little bit you know horror
sites yeah I don't know about that one
but potentially govern govern us yeah so
would you know they might be able to
control us but could they be us could
can we make something that is human like
that I mean that's just that sci-fi
again that's what like so meaty
shows about it but can you make them
feel like emotion or like have a history
or feel love and like but I think they
could probably like take over the world
without having that so well in
artificial intelligence I would be able
to make like ethical decisions that are
like leaders will have to make obviously
they're pretty much already better than
us in some forms intelligence like just
simply doing sums and making like really
like yes or no decisions they can do
those because they can crunch all the
numbers and but will they ever be able
to could like take ethical decisions
that's an interesting question I it
depends on like your view of ethics so
for example with utilitarianism it is
very formulaic so it's very much you
know oh if we add up this like this
action will cause 10 points of goodness
for this person - five points of
goodness for this person and add it all
up overall it's a good action so if we
look at like a very formulaic view of
ethics then yeah I think so if you feel
like I just feel like this is a right
decision or I feel like this is a wrong
decision then I'm not so sure yeah there
was a something else I discussed with
this opposite elders research it was
about the idea of artificial
intelligence being used for weapons so
this idea of you could have a sort of a
small drone which was loaded with a bomb
or a gun or something which could like
sort of fly in and make decisions on
particular targets that it could then
sort of take out and this is currently
actually a very hot topic in the field
that we in theory could kind of create
this technology and it's sort of saying
should we allow those decisions to be
made by an artificial intelligence but
should we still have that thing that
requires a human being to sort of press
that button which I think links were
really well into what you saying about
ethics and it was actually a letter
written by lots of senior people in tech
including sort of people like Elon Musk
and Stephen hook Stephen Hawking when he
was still alive had signed this this
letter saying that the United Nations
need to sort of think about this think
about encoding this into law before
these things are created for and then we
sort of lose that actual ethical power
as a human to say yes or no
sorry very very good question thank you
whoever you may be right so I think this
one is possibly going to link towards
yourself Olivia okay so this one's from
Emily hi Emily thank you a question
and we asks will a time come when all
possible ideas brackets in the arts have
been done so we ever has done everything
you can think of in in the arts well I
mean we've not got there yet Disney's
certainly trying by just reanimated ones
and I'm not sure we will you know
because the suit because we do often go
back to literature and we go back to
formulaic stories and we put poems into
films and books into films and films
into books and but with every new
generation and every new development
something changes that can be that can
affect our arts and the way that
people's minds work now we've got so
much more now like kind of LGBT are that
you you know 100 200 years ago they
might have said that that would never
occur and here it is and we're only just
touching the tip of that as like a field
and then you know linking to like AI and
technology as soon as we get a new piece
of technology and there's a new book
about it or a new film about it and then
there's someone who's got a different
perspective about that and sometimes
retelling old stories in new ways like
Shakespeare we've been doing that for
hundreds of years and people still every
year for hundreds of productions on and
they're all different so I don't think
we ever will I hope we do I'm glad you
made shakes I was allowed to come in
with the shakers I was like you know
there's so many different film
adaptations and performances you know
like as she said with maybe in different
languages with different interpretations
with different people playing different
roles it's you can always just sort of
have almost like one thing and then just
do it in almost an infinite number of
ways yeah this takes
change one person you have no idea to
take a story that's been told for a
thousand years and do it in a different
way yeah I got something else as well
because it's not so much about like the
ideas but in terms of like the way
people view the things because like
obviously it was back in the day it was
all on stage and then it moved to like
being on TV and then there was a thing
recently it was like a film that is
interactive so you make decisions kind
of you're viewing it through the eyes of
someone you make decisions on that so
it's really cool with like the new
technology to make them interactive you
can make it so much more immersive as
well with virtual reality but those
things every head to me kind of look
around and you're basically in that
environment make it so much more
immersive and that would open it to like
then play with new ideas if it's much
more immersive like that yeah building
on top of that as well it's also I think
a lot of a lot the main thing about art
is either what it makes you feel or what
it makes you think and that is very
dependent on which stage you're at in
your life or even in your day so you
could watch the exact same Shakespeare
film with the exact same actors the
exact same music but you watch it on a
different day more you're feeling
slightly differently and you will
interpret it slightly differently so I
think in that sense the beauty of the
art will never like reach I don't know a
point where it's like all been done
because it's very much dependent on
using and the shared viewing as weld and
the arms between watching in a cinema
with a group of people or sat at home
with a cup of tea and watching something
and all those things like the way you as
a spectator view something like there's
so many different things that affect it
awesome thank you very much so we're not
going to debate this one but I have to
say it so this is from CSL Pro is the
name spelt who asks the biggest question
is what is better dogs or cats fYI it's
obviously cats I'm sorry CSL Pro it's
it's definitely dogs yeah we have a
quick quiz like dogs or cats cats dogs
okay don't win I mean we've answered it
sorry right no more serious one from
Francis in year 11 we haven't yet had a
question for me 11 so hello Francis
thanks for getting in touch why is there
a tendency for societies to place
individuals in positions of power
so why why do we as society pick
individuals to sort of run things rather
than groups of people I suppose is
perhaps what they're getting at or I
guess interpret it in your own way I
would interpret it as why do we pick
specific individuals to like have
certain amounts of power and I think it
comes from a sense of like projection so
I think there are qualities that we
probably see in these people that we
admire or qualities we see in these
people that we may see in ourselves
which is why you'd want them to
represent you or qualities that you see
in these people that you just think
would be good for I know handling power
or running a country or running a group
and I think that's the main reason why
we pick certain individuals to have
power if it is I guess what you were
alluding to so why do we pick
individuals as opposed to a group I
think maybe it just comes from like a
lack of complication because a lot of
times in a group there are so many
different voices that need to be
considered there are so many different
points of view that need to be
considered which is very valuable but it
can be quite time-consuming and like
resource intensive so it might just be
easier to have one person just make the
decisions and everyone just goes with it
it's almost like you need that final
say-so it's like you want the wealth of
evidence you want to get those different
perspectives like you said but
ultimately you're always going to need
that one person who's almost like got
the responsibility here to actually make
that final decision I'd say we have to
think about see was the question was
like as a society we put individuals in
power and I guess we have to question
that because historically I'm thinking
the way you know there was no big vote
where everyone in England was Lara we'll
do it this way it was a small group of
people who picked for it to be one of
their own so I think we have to think
deeper about the fact that it's not
necessarily something we've chosen as a
society it's something that the elites
we'd call them or you know those who
yeah at least like the rich probably
would have chosen one of their own to
and why they've done that not
necessarily wise seen it's not always
the whole society fabulous right so we
have a question here from Goff school
thank you very much this is a fun one
what was the best era or time period for
humans to live in beyond the obvious
answer of right now because you enjoy
this fabulous ox law livestream with our
lovely myself but you know I guess more
generally what was the best era or time
period for humans to live in pens who
you are I think because there's lots of
lots of little arguments in history
where some people try and argue that
especially about women some people argue
that this was the era of the like golden
era for women and people people debate
that and some people say it's at the
1400s which is you know take that is
what you will but I guess it yeah it
depends yah maybe to be a kind of just a
regular average Jo modern day is better
but if you mountains have royal blood in
you I think you'd want to be born in the
1500s where you could really really do
some do some damage and you know name a
name an entire religion after yourself
like Henry the eighth day knowing it
depends and also I'm just thinking I'd
love to put alive like as a caveman
Neanderthal free is like hunting
mammoths I like wearing animal for like
living in a cave or a bit awesome I
don't know maybe think about all this
technology maybe we don't need it maybe
we'll be better if it was just a simple
life and we're just you know living as
hunter-gatherers but then you could also
say that the best generation it's gonna
be the next one because we've got all
these exciting things that we might be
able to do in the future so it might be
better if we're just living in the next
generation that could you always say
that but you can't always say that
because you don't know what's gonna be
happening next I'd say it was the era
when cupcakes were like first it's just
such like an interesting concept like
cakes but they're small then we put like
some sweet stuff like it's just really
enjoyable
I personally would have liked to have
been there as they made that decision
you know let's just make a small
individual kit like cool just feel that
one it's for that one magic moment yeah
just then and then I like come back to
take the first person ever to taste a
cupcake yeah the right answer is when
cook cupcakes were made for the first
time also thank you very much coughs
cool right so we are more or less coming
to a close so it's got one final big
question which will go to each of you
all individually so if you had a big
question yourself what would you do to
get an answer and as seeing as we just
came this way through the line I guess
if we start with Olivia and then go back
I would say don't just go to Wikipedia
that's not gonna give you the answer
that you want and you don't know who
wrote that I would say think about what
field you're looking at whether your big
questions about its history or something
and then go and find a couple of books
short introductions are very good that
Oxford do find your local uni library
head off there yeah and find some
answers so if I had a big question if it
was more like on a science he saw a big
question the chances are somebody else
there's a high chance that someone else
would have thought of it before that
before you thought of it so there'll be
a wealth of information available to you
to just research and explore and see see
where it takes you pretty much ask
people who know more about to look at
books just go explore yeah I think in
exceling it's important to add that
while many questions in science that
other people may have thought up that
you think of us as big unanswered
questions there are of course different
ways of interpreting the same question
so just just as a complete example my my
research looks at where does River War
to go when it enters the ocean
that sounds like a question we know the
answer to of course turns out we don't
really yeah it's not as easy as it
spreads out everywhere there's you know
there's so many other sort of bits
inside that question so that sort of is
currently an active research question I
said that I'm currently working on which
sounds like we would know the answer to
so I think sort of you know building on
what Felix has said it's the us this
idea of have your big question look up
what's going on in in that subject area
find out as much as you can and then
interpret it and sort of come to your
own conclusions
perhaps Esther anything to add yeah just
in addition to what has already been
said I'd say ask anyone and everyone I
think as we mentioned before what makes
a big question a big question is the
fact that it requires a range of
perspectives so even if the person isn't
an expert on the field just the fact
that they have an alternative
perspective is really useful very
valuable so just speak to people ask and
yes that's my answer
and of course go to Oxford org to find
out all of the other 50 big questions
which we have looked at in the past
right thank you so much panel I hope
you've had fun I've certainly had fun I
hope everyone watching has had fun thank
you so much as always for getting
involved for tuning in for sending in
all of your questions the prize door
will remain open until 11 o'clock on
Monday morning so please do keep sending
in your big questions we will pick our
favorites and you can win some prizes
you can get in touch on the Oxbow
website or you can get in touch on
social media at let's ox blah and I
think that is pretty much it from us so
again thank you so much for joining in
and hopefully see you next time
[Music]